# nobis_tracts

With this pipeline, we generate extended-amygdalar to brainstem structural connectomes from diffusion weighted and T1-weighted images using the MRTrix3, FSL, and ANTs software packages [1][2][3]. First, we take regions of interest (ROIs) of the extended amygdala and the brainstem defined in MNI space and nonlinearly warp them to the preprocessed b0 image [4][5][6][7][8]. We do this by first performing an affine registration between the subject’s first b0 image and the subject’s T1-weighted image [9][10][11]. We then perform an affine and nonlinear registration between the subject’s T1-weighted image and MNI space [12]. We then invert the transformations to move the MNI-defined ROIs to subject diffusion space. The extended-amygdalar ROIs are then used as seed regions for probablistic tractography to the target brainstem regions [13][14]. One hundred thousand seed points are used, and tracts are terminated when the arrive at their target. Two connectomes are then generated. The first quantifies the number of tracts out of 100000 that connect any two ROIs corrected for distance between ROIs. The second takes this tract number and normalizes it to the volume of the target ROI.

## Requirements/Prerequisites

- dtiQA/prequal pipeline

## Version Information

- Current Version: nobis_tracts_v1.0.5
- Processor Name: nobis_tracts_v1.0.5_processor.yaml
- Singularity Recipe and Code: https://github.com/MASILab/nobis
- SHA256 Hash: nobis_tracts_v1.0.5.simg (SHA256 e90a9c2916c3563d1c658590e0d0bc823f20cbee98624bca0462397cf35d20e2)

## Code

- [GitHub Repository for Current Spider](https://github.com/MASILab/nobis)

## References

- [Tournier, J-Donald et al. “MRtrix3: A fast, flexible and open software framework for medical image processing and visualisation.” NeuroImage vol. 202 (2019): 116137. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.116137](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31473352/)
MRtrix3 is an open-source, cross-platform software package for medical image processing, analysis and visualisation, with a particular emphasis on the investigation of the brain using diffusion MRI. It is implemented using a fast, modular and flexible general-purpose code framework for image data access and manipulation, enabling efficient development of new applications, whilst retaining high computational performance and a consistent command-line interface between applications. In this article, we provide a high-level overview of the features of the MRtrix3 framework and general-purpose image processing applications provided with the software.

- [Jenkinson, Mark et al. “FSL.” NeuroImage vol. 62,2 (2012): 782-90. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.09.015](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21979382/)
FSL (the FMRIB Software Library) is a comprehensive library of analysis tools for functional, structural and diffusion MRI brain imaging data, written mainly by members of the Analysis Group, FMRIB, Oxford. For this NeuroImage special issue on “20 years of fMRI” we have been asked to write about the history, developments and current status of FSL. We also include some descriptions of parts of FSL that are not well covered in the existing literature. We hope that some of this content might be of interest to users of FSL, and also maybe to new research groups considering creating, releasing and supporting new software packages for brain image analysis.

- [Tustison, Nicholas J et al. “Large-scale evaluation of ANTs and FreeSurfer cortical thickness measurements.” NeuroImage vol. 99 (2014): 166-79. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.05.044](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24879923/)
Many studies of the human brain have explored the relationship between cortical thickness and cognition, phenotype, or disease. Due to the subjectivity and time requirements in manual measurement of cortical thickness, scientists have relied on robust software tools for automation which facilitate the testing and refinement of neuroscientific hypotheses. The most widely used tool for cortical thickness studies is the publicly available, surface-based FreeSurfer package. Critical to the adoption of such tools is a demonstration of their reproducibility, validity, and the documentation of specific implementations that are robust across large, diverse imaging datasets. To this end, we have developed the automated, volume-based Advanced Normalization Tools (ANTs) cortical thickness pipeline comprising well-vetted components such as SyGN (multivariate template construction), SyN (image registration), N4 (bias correction), Atropos (n-tissue segmentation), and DiReCT (cortical thickness estimation). In this work, we have conducted the largest evaluation of automated cortical thickness measures in publicly available data, comparing FreeSurfer and ANTs measures computed on 1205 images from four open data sets (IXI, MMRR, NKI, and OASIS), with parcellation based on the recently proposed Desikan-Killiany-Tourville (DKT) cortical labeling protocol. We found good scan-rescan repeatability with both FreeSurfer and ANTs measures. Given that such assessments of precision do not necessarily reflect accuracy or an ability to make statistical inferences, we further tested the neurobiological validity of these approaches by evaluating thickness-based prediction of age and gender. ANTs is shown to have a higher predictive performance than FreeSurfer for both of these measures. In promotion of open science, we make all of our scripts, data, and results publicly available which complements the use of open image data sets and the open source availability of the proposed ANTs cortical thickness pipeline.

- [Makris, Nikos et al. “Decreased volume of left and total anterior insular lobule in schizophrenia.” Schizophrenia research vol. 83,2-3 (2006): 155-71. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2005.11.020](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16448806/)
The insula is anatomically situated to be critically involved in many bio-behavioral functions impaired in schizophrenia. Furthermore, its total volume has been shown to be reduced in schizophrenia. In the present study, we tested the hypothesis that in schizophrenia it is the anterior insular lobule (aINS(lbl)) rather than the posterior insular lobule (pINS(lbl)) that is smaller, given that limbic system abnormalities are central in schizophrenia and that the affiliations of the limbic system are principally with the anterior insular lobule. We used T1-weighted high resolution magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to measure the cortical volume of the left and right anterior and posterior insular subdivisions. The subjects included a sample of healthy community controls (N=40) and chronic patients with DSM-III-R schizophrenia (N=41). We correlated insula volumes with positive and negative symptoms. We found that the total aINS(lbl), and the left aINS(lbl) in particular, were significantly volumetrically smaller in schizophrenia compared to controls, and significantly correlated with bizarre behavior. Given that the anterior insular lobule offers anatomic features that allow for MRI-based morphometric analysis, namely its central and circular sulci, this brain structure provides a useful model to test hypotheses regarding genotype-phenotype relationships in schizophrenia using the anterior insular lobule as a candidate endophenotype.

- [Frazier, Jean A et al. “Structural brain magnetic resonance imaging of limbic and thalamic volumes in pediatric bipolar disorder.” The American journal of psychiatry vol. 162,7 (2005): 1256-65. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.162.7.1256](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15994707/)
  - Background: Youths with bipolar disorder are ideal for studying illness pathophysiology given their early presentation, lack of extended treatment, and high genetic loading. Adult bipolar disorder MRI studies have focused increasingly on limbic structures and the thalamus because of their role in mood and cognition. On the basis of adult studies, the authors hypothesized a priori that youths with bipolar disorder would have amygdalar, hippocampal, and thalamic volume abnormalities.
  - Method: Forty-three youths 6-16 years of age with DSM-IV bipolar disorder (23 male, 20 female) and 20 healthy comparison subjects (12 male, eight female) similar in age and sex underwent structured and clinical interviews, neurological examination, and cognitive testing. Differences in limbic and thalamic brain volumes, on the logarithmic scale, were tested using a two-way (diagnosis and sex) univariate analysis of variance, with total cerebral volume and age controlled.
  - Results: The subjects with bipolar disorder had smaller hippocampal volumes. Further analysis revealed that this effect was driven predominantly by the female bipolar disorder subjects. In addition, both male and female youths with bipolar disorder had significantly smaller cerebral volumes. No significant hemispheric effects were seen.
  - Conclusions: These findings support the hypothesis that the limbic system, in particular the hippocampus, may be involved in the pathophysiology of pediatric bipolar disorder. While this report may represent the largest MRI study of pediatric bipolar disorder to date, more work is needed to confirm these findings and to determine if they are unique to pediatric bipolar disorder.

- [Desikan, R. S., Ségonne, F., Fischl, B., Quinn, B. T., Dickerson, B. C., Blacker, D., Buckner, R. L., Dale, A. M., Maguire, R. P., Hyman, B. T., Albert, M. S., & Killiany, R. J. (2006). An automated labeling system for subdividing the human cerebral cortex on MRI scans into gyral based regions of interest. NeuroImage, 31(3), 968-980. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.01.021](https://jhu.pure.elsevier.com/en/publications/an-automated-labeling-system-for-subdividing-the-human-cerebral-c-4)
In this study, we have assessed the validity and reliability of an automated labeling system that we have developed for subdividing the human cerebral cortex on magnetic resonance images into gyral based regions of interest (ROIs). Using a dataset of 40 MRI scans we manually identified 34 cortical ROIs in each of the individual hemispheres. This information was then encoded in the form of an atlas that was utilized to automatically label ROIs. To examine the validity, as well as the intra- and inter-rater reliability of the automated system, we used both intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC), and a new method known as mean distance maps, to assess the degree of mismatch between the manual and the automated sets of ROIs. When compared with the manual ROIs, the automated ROIs were highly accurate, with an average ICC of 0.835 across all of the ROIs, and a mean distance error of less than 1 mm. Intra- and inter-rater comparisons yielded little to no difference between the sets of ROIs. These findings suggest that the automated method we have developed for subdividing the human cerebral cortex into standard gyral-based neuroanatomical regions is both anatomically valid and reliable. This method may be useful for both morphometric and functional studies of the cerebral cortex as well as for clinical investigations aimed at tracking the evolution of disease-induced changes over time, including clinical trials in which MRI-based measures are used to examine response to treatment.

- [Goldstein JM, Seidman LJ, Makris N, et al. Hypothalamic abnormalities in schizophrenia: sex effects and genetic vulnerability. Biol Psychiatry. 2007;61(8):935‐945. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.06.027](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17046727/)
  - Background: This is a unique hypothalamic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study in schizophrenia, an important region in the limbic system. We hypothesized abnormal volumetric increases, with greater severity in multiplex families (more than one ill member) compared with simplex families (one ill). We tested the hypothesis that normal hypothalamic sexual dimorphism is disrupted in schizophrenia.
  - Methods: Eighty-eight DSM-III-R schizophrenia cases (40 simplex and 48 multiplex), 43 first-degree nonpsychotic relatives, and 48 normal comparisons systematically were compared. A 1.5-Tesla General Electric scanner was used to acquire structural MRI scans, and contiguous 3.1-mm slices were used to segment anterior and posterior hypothalamus. General linear model for correlated data and generalized estimating equations were used to compare cases, relatives, and controls on right and left hypothalamus, controlled for age, sex, and total cerebral volume. Spearman’s correlations of hypothalamic volumes with anxiety were calculated to begin to examine arousal correlates with structural abnormalities.
  - Results: Findings demonstrated significantly increased hypothalamic volume in cases and nonpsychotic relatives, particularly in regions of paraventricular and mammillary body nuclei, respectively. This increase was linear from simplex to multiplex cases, was positively correlated with anxiety, and had a greater propensity in women.
  - Conclusions: Findings suggest important implications for understanding genetic vulnerability of schizophrenia and the high rate of endocrine abnormalities.

- [Theiss JD, Ridgewell C, McHugo M, Heckers S, Blackford JU. Manual segmentation of the human bed nucleus of the stria terminalis using 3T MRI. Neuroimage. 2017;146:288‐292. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.11.047](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27876653/)
The bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST)-a small gray matter region located in the basal forebrain-has been implicated in both anxiety and addiction based on compelling evidence from rodent and non-human primate studies. However, the BNST’s small size and proximity to other gray matter regions has hindered non-invasive study in human subjects using standard neuroimaging methods. While initial studies have benefitted from a BNST mask created from a single human subject using a 7T scanner, individual variability is likely-especially in patient populations-thus a manual segmentation protocol is needed. Here we report on the development of a reliable manual segmentation protocol performed on 3T MRI images using a scanning sequence that provides high gray matter/white matter/cerebrospinal fluid contrast. Inter- and intra-rater reliabilities, measured in 10 healthy individuals, demonstrate that the protocol can be reliably implemented (intra-rater Dice similarity coefficient≥0.85, inter-rater≥0.77). This BNST tracing protocol provides the necessary foundation for future 3T MRI studies of the BNST in healthy controls and patient populations.

- [Jenkinson M, Bannister P, Brady M, Smith S. Improved optimization for the robust and accurate linear registration and motion correction of brain images. Neuroimage. 2002;17(2):825‐841. doi:10.1016/s1053-8119(02)91132-8](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12377157/)
Linear registration and motion correction are important components of structural and functional brain image analysis. Most modern methods optimize some intensity-based cost function to determine the best registration. To date, little attention has been focused on the optimization method itself, even though the success of most registration methods hinges on the quality of this optimization. This paper examines the optimization process in detail and demonstrates that the commonly used multiresolution local optimization methods can, and do, get trapped in local minima. To address this problem, two approaches are taken: (1) to apodize the cost function and (2) to employ a novel hybrid global-local optimization method. This new optimization method is specifically designed for registering whole brain images. It substantially reduces the likelihood of producing misregistrations due to being trapped by local minima. The increased robustness of the method, compared to other commonly used methods, is demonstrated by a consistency test. In addition, the accuracy of the registration is demonstrated by a series of experiments with motion correction. These motion correction experiments also investigate how the results are affected by different cost functions and interpolation methods.

- [Jenkinson M, Smith S. A global optimisation method for robust affine registration of brain images. Med Image Anal. 2001;5(2):143‐156. doi:10.1016/s1361-8415(01)00036-6](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11516708/)
Registration is an important component of medical image analysis and for analysing large amounts of data it is desirable to have fully automatic registration methods. Many different automatic registration methods have been proposed to date, and almost all share a common mathematical framework – one of optimising a cost function. To date little attention has been focused on the optimisation method itself, even though the success of most registration methods hinges on the quality of this optimisation. This paper examines the assumptions underlying the problem of registration for brain images using inter-modal voxel similarity measures. It is demonstrated that the use of local optimisation methods together with the standard multi-resolution approach is not sufficient to reliably find the global minimum. To address this problem, a global optimisation method is proposed that is specifically tailored to this form of registration. A full discussion of all the necessary implementation details is included as this is an important part of any practical method. Furthermore, results are presented for inter-modal, inter-subject registration experiments that show that the proposed method is more reliable at finding the global minimum than several of the currently available registration packages in common usage.

- [Greve DN, Fischl B. Accurate and robust brain image alignment using boundary-based registration. Neuroimage. 2009;48(1):63‐72. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.06.060](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19573611/)
The fine spatial scales of the structures in the human brain represent an enormous challenge to the successful integration of information from different images for both within- and between-subject analysis. While many algorithms to register image pairs from the same subject exist, visual inspection shows that their accuracy and robustness to be suspect, particularly when there are strong intensity gradients and/or only part of the brain is imaged. This paper introduces a new algorithm called Boundary-Based Registration, or BBR. The novelty of BBR is that it treats the two images very differently. The reference image must be of sufficient resolution and quality to extract surfaces that separate tissue types. The input image is then aligned to the reference by maximizing the intensity gradient across tissue boundaries. Several lower quality images can be aligned through their alignment with the reference. Visual inspection and fMRI results show that BBR is more accurate than correlation ratio or normalized mutual information and is considerably more robust to even strong intensity inhomogeneities. BBR also excels at aligning partial-brain images to whole-brain images, a domain in which existing registration algorithms frequently fail. Even in the limit of registering a single slice, we show the BBR results to be robust and accurate.

- [Avants BB, Epstein CL, Grossman M, Gee JC. Symmetric diffeomorphic image registration with cross-correlation: evaluating automated labeling of elderly and neurodegenerative brain. Med Image Anal. 2008;12(1):26‐41. doi:10.1016/j.media.2007.06.004](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2276735/)
One of the most challenging problems in modern neuroimaging is detailed characterization of neurodegeneration. Quantifying spatial and longitudinal atrophy patterns is an important component of this process. These spatiotemporal signals will aid in discriminating between related diseases, such as frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and Alzheimer’s disease (AD), which manifest themselves in the same at-risk population. Here, we develop a novel symmetric image normalization method (SyN) for maximizing the cross-correlation within the space of diffeomorphic maps and provide the Euler-Lagrange equations necessary for this optimization. We then turn to a careful evaluation of our method. Our evaluation uses gold standard, human cortical segmentation to contrast SyN’s performance with a related elastic method and with the standard ITK implementation of Thirion’s Demons algorithm. The new method compares favorably with both approaches, in particular when the distance between the template brain and the target brain is large. We then report the correlation of volumes gained by algorithmic cortical labelings of FTD and control subjects with those gained by the manual rater. This comparison shows that, of the three methods tested, SyN’s volume measurements are the most strongly correlated with volume measurements gained by expert labeling. This study indicates that SyN, with cross-correlation, is a reliable method for normalizing and making anatomical measurements in volumetric MRI of patients and at-risk elderly individuals.

- [Tournier JD, Calamante F, Connelly A. Determination of the appropriate b value and number of gradient directions for high-angular-resolution diffusion-weighted imaging. NMR Biomed. 2013;26(12):1775‐1786. doi:10.1002/nbm.3017](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24038308/)
High-angular-resolution diffusion-weighted imaging (HARDI) is one of the most common MRI acquisition schemes for use with higher order models of diffusion. However, the optimal b value and number of diffusion-weighted (DW) directions for HARDI are still undetermined, primarily as a result of the large number of available reconstruction methods and corresponding parameters, making it impossible to identify a single criterion by which to assess performance. In this study, we estimate the minimum number of DW directions and optimal b values required for HARDI by focusing on the angular frequency content of the DW signal itself. The spherical harmonic (SH) series provides the spherical analogue of the Fourier series, and can hence be used to examine the angular frequency content of the DW signal. Using high-quality data acquired along 500 directions over a range of b values, we estimate that SH terms above l = 8 are negligible in practice for b values up to 5000 s/mm(2), implying that a minimum of 45 DW directions is sufficient to fully characterise the DW signal. l > 0 SH terms were found to increase as a function of b value, levelling off at b = 3000 s/mm(2), suggesting that this value already provides the highest achievable angular resolution. In practice, it is recommended to acquire more than the minimum of 45 DW directions to avoid issues with imperfections in the uniformity of the DW gradient directions and to meet signal-to-noise requirements of the intended reconstruction method.

- [Tournier, J., Calamante, F., & Connelly, A. (2009). Improved probabilistic streamlines tractography by 2 nd order integration over fibre orientation distributions.](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Improved-probabilistic-streamlines-tractography-by-Tournier-Calamante/b4ffcb9ec889a8a68bffc46387a96b78a50ef94a?p2df)
Probabilistic streamlines algorithms are amongst the most promising methods for fibre-tracking, but are potentially subject to a number of deficiencies. These include a tendency to overshoot in highly curved regions, and to switch directions in crossing fibre regions. To address both of these issues, we propose a higher-order probabilistic streamlines algorithm, based on 2nd order integration over fibre orientation distributions (iFOD2), with a computational complexity similar to current first order methods. We demonstrate the advantages of the proposed iFOD2 algorithm on simulated data, and apply the method to in-vivo data.
